---
title: Understanding Rating Systems
image: /images/not-sucking.jpg
imageMeta:
  attribution: Isaac Smith
  attributionLink: https://unsplash.com/photos/6EnTPvPPL6I
featured: true
authors:
  - jordan-hawker
date: Fri Jan 22 2021 21:43:00 GMT+0800 (PST)
tags:
meta:
---

There are a lot of different rating systems around the industry, 
and you may be wondering why we didn't just adopt one used elsewhere. 
Let's take a quick look at how we think about our ratings,
as well as the benefits and drawbacks of popular systems.

# Goals

Each rating system has different goals and meanings for both the
reviewer and the reader. We need to be cognizant of these different 
aspects to make sure our ratings convey value to everyone.

## Consistency

For reviewers themselves as well as long-time readers, rating systems 
are about consistency. They let us look at the historical statistics of 
our ratings, to understand a reviewer's average rating as well as the 
absolute range in which they've operated. This information is crucial 
to helping understand what a single rating means within the larger picture 
of a reviewer's individual taste.

If a reviewer switches between different systems, there's a loss of fidelity 
as both the reader and the reviewer themselves struggles to relate between 
the two systems. What may have made sense in the moment becomes more difficult 
to understand as time passes, and ratings are a historical record of the 
tasting experience. Consistency ensures that ratings still have meaning 
and value after time passes!

## Comparisons

Using the same metrics for each review gives relative meaning to different 
reviews, providing a quantifiable measure for comparing different products. 
It is often difficult to understand how a reviewer's experience relates 
to their other tastings by words alone. At the end of the day, many 
readers want to know if one review constitutes a better rating than 
another review. In a world of many great products, there are sometimes 
minute differences that don't surface well in their written thoughts. 
As such, being able to directly compare two ratings generated by the 
same, consistent system provides immediate value to everyone.

## Quantitative Value

This is the goal everyone thinks of when they talk about ratings. 
Distilling many positive and negative thoughts into a single result 
(or sometimes multiple values) is a difficult process, but it's a 
valuable endeavor for both reader and reviewer alike. A quantitative 
rating provides an easily digestible measure of how good (or bad) a 
product is. This is great as a quick reference, as well as for 
comparing a reviewer's experience across many products, as we 
mentioned above. Of course, it's also a popular marketing tool; 
consumers love easy choices, and distilling the qualities of a 
product down to a rating means we don't have to think as hard!

Some people will contend that ratings are meaningless and only the 
tasting notes and written word matter, but we believe there is no 
"one size fits all" solution. At the end of the day, if you want to 
read people's thoughts and ignore their quantitative ratings, go for it! 
There are plenty of other people who find value in this approach, 
so we feel it's important to provide it as a quick, accessible measure 
of our thoughts.

# Rating Systems

Now that you understand the goals of a good rating system, let's take 
a look at some different systems you might see in use. We want to be 
up front that while the following takes a critical look at the benefits 
and drawbacks of each system in theory, this should not be viewed as a 
criticism of any other reviewer's approach. We're providing this to give 
more context to how we designed our own ratings, and so that everyone 
can be aware of the implications of choosing a particular scale. There 
is no perfect answer (that we know of!), just different options available.

## 100-Point Scale

The classic scale topping out at a perfect 100 is perhaps the most 
widely-used rating system in the world today. In the world of spirits, 
Robert M. Parker, Jr. is broadly credited with introducing a specific 
100-Point system for rating wines. The "Parker Scale", as we call it 
here at Hella Drunk, does not encompass the full range of 0-100 as 
one might assume at first. Rather, it starts at 50 and roughly 
corresponds to letter grades used by the American education system. 
To simplify it, 90+ is a great rating, 80+ is above average, 70+ is 
average, and anything below 60 is an outright unacceptable product.

### Benefits

Now, there are a lot of advantages to a 100-point scale. For example, 
there's a lot of room to be particular about minute differences across 
such a large range of values. Using whole numbers to differentiate scores 
is generally easier to parse than decimal values. People also inherently 
understand scores out of 100 due to their frequent use in educational 
testing and prevalence of percentage values for all manner of uses 
throughout society.

Additionally, there's always a benefit to using the same system as 
everyone else. Even though ratings are always subjective and specific 
to the reviewer, people still like to compare scores across publications.

### Drawbacks

Conversely, however, even the top half of 100 points provides a lot of 
possible scores, which can sometimes seem overwhelming to process. 
There are debates over whether a difference of one point between two 
scores actually has meaning. While people like to think of these scores 
as percentages, they're very clearly not, since nothing can score less 
than 50. This creates a misleading impression for some readers who, 
for example, might see a 75 as a pretty great score. After all, 75% 
means that 3 out of every 4 is worse than that score, if it was truly a 
percentage. However, in the way most people utilize a 100-point scale, 
75 is straight up average, in some ways roughly analogous to 50% (but 
not quite). This can be confusing for people who aren't already familiar 
with the Parker Scale, and we believe that ratings should ultimately be 
accessible and intuitive.

Finally, there is a lot of nuance lost in reporting just a single score 
out of 100. What were points lost for? How were they gained? Sure, you can 
read the text of the review to find the context, but having to do that 
to understand every rating undermines the convenience of the ratings 
themselves. You may notice that many implementations of this system 
tend toward grouping the vast majority of ratings around the mid-80s and 
low 90s, leaving readers with a lot of very similar ratings to consider. 
Two close ratings may have been achieved for wildly different reasons 
that matter more or less to the reader, and the 100-point scale 
doesn't do a great job of surfacing that information.

## Letter Grade Scale

Some reviewers have eschewed the Parker Scale in favor of the standardized 
letter grade system it was patterned after. That is, ratings run from a 
top score of A+ down to the bottom of the barrel at F (or possibly even F-, 
if necessary). Sometime around the 1940s, letter grades became popular in 
the United States education system, anchoring letter values around a 
100-point scale already in use at the time (A = 90+, B=80+, and so on). 
It's interesting how that evolution came full circle, eh? Anyway, the 
letter grade system was also closely bound to existing 4-point scales, 
which you may recognize as the Grade Point Average (GPA) scale.

### Benefits

Letter grade systems are easy to understand, at least for people who are 
familiar with education systems and other places they've been used for decades. 
It also creates a clear sequence of quality, between the letter itself and the 
+/- modifiers that can be applied. By reducing the number of possible values 
from 50 (in the Parker Scale) to 15 (5 letter grades + 10 modified letters 
between them), the comparisons between values are intuitive and immediately 
obvious.

### Drawbacks

The flip side to having so few values that can be assigned is that it's less 
useful for directly comparing two ratings. There are only so many buckets you 
can assign a product to, which makes it highly likely that a lot of them will 
have the same score. Any time two products have the same score, we assume 
they are of equal quality. However, many readers will still ask how they can 
make a choice between the two. The letter grade system greatly increases the 
probability of two products having the same score, directly because it tries 
to simplify the scoring system by removing intermediate scores from the 
100-point scale.

Another potential drawback of the letter grade approach is its inflexibility 
when it comes to comparing it to other rating systems. While always suboptimal 
to an extent, numerical values can at least be converted between most systems. 
As long as there is a minimum and maximum to the scale, we can scale ratings 
up or down to match other systems and get a reasonable approximation. With 
letter grades, however, each letter naturally represents a *range* of numerical 
values along the 100-point scale. For example, A- is traditionally 90-93, A+ 
is often 97-100, and so on. If an A rating is assigned to a product, what 
exact numerical value would you convert that to? 94? 95? 96? While similar 
issues exist with scaling up smaller numerical systems to the 100-point version, 
the problem in those instances is less one of exactness and more of simply 
having fewer intervals.

## 10-Point Scale

A simple scale from 1 to 10. Easy, right? This scale is a bit of an enigma, 
mostly because it is utilized in divergent ways despite having the same 
minimum and maximum values. Some reviewers will adhere strictly to the integer 
numbers, while others prefer using decimal values in between. Some of those 
who use decimals will implicitly follow the Parker Scale by grouping their 
ratings around the top half of the scale. In either case, the 10-point scale 
is a fairly popular alternative to the full 100-point scale.

### Benefits

It's easy to count from 1 to 10. The simple version of this scale has many of 
the same benefits as the letter grade system, in that it reduces scoring down to 
just a handful of possible values. Some people find this version more familiar 
due to the prevalence of 10-point scales in certain competitions. We can all think 
back to some time when we've seen a panel of judges hold up their scoring signs to 
show 8s, 9s, or even 10s! For those who want more granularity, however, half-step 
or even decimal intervals can be introduced. Using decimals more or less approximates 
the 100-point scale, just divided by 10. For those who use the full scale 
and *don't* want to get confused with the top-heavy Parker Scale, it's easy to see 
why they might choose this option instead.

### Drawbacks

On the other hand, do we need a 10-point decimal scale if we can just use 100-point 
systems instead? Perhaps a reviewer feels it's easier to mentally decide their 
score out of 10, but then couldn't they still report it out of 100? If the integer 
scale is used instead, that would seem to have similar drawbacks to the letter grade 
system, in that there aren't enough intervals to differentiate reviews from one 
another.

## 5-Point Scale

I like to think of the 5-point scale as the "Star Scale", because that's how many 
reviewers choose to represent it. This scale often allows for decimal values, but 
only to indicate a half-step. That is, you might see a score of 3.5 or 4.5, but 
rarely do reviewers seem to use 3.7 or 2.8, for example. In our experience, this is 
probably the third most-popular system for rating spirits, after the 100-point and 
10-point scales.

### Benefits

The immediately obvious value of this system is the way it translates to an intuitive 
set of symbols such as stars. A review can say they're giving 4 1/2 stars, for example, 
and it's very clear what that means. The scale is small, yes, but it tracks well 
with other systems. For example, allowing half-step intervals makes the 5-point scale 
roughly equal to the 10-point integer scale, with the added benefits of clarity we 
just outlined. Additionally, since the aforementioned Parker Scale runs from 50-100, 
that's very similar to just scoring from 5-10, or really, 0-5. As such, the 5-point 
scale very nicely encapsulates a similar range to the 100-point scale without the 
confusing exclusion of half the numbers.

### Drawbacks

As you're probably already guessing, this system has similar drawbacks to the 10-point 
scale or letter grades. Reducing the number of intervals necessarily creates a loss 
of fidelity, and you'll find a lot of products end up getting scores of 3.5, 4, or 4.5. 
This scale is also slightly harder to convert to the 100-point system. Do you assume 
a 2.5/5 is 50/100, or do you treat it like the Parker Scale and call it 75/100? All 
conversions require an inherent understanding of the reviewer's thought process for 
scoring, but this particular scale is a little more difficult than most.

## Multi-Rating Systems

Some reviewers, including Hella Drunk, utilize a system where they publish ratings for 
multiple categories as well as an overall score. Each category represents a different 
aspect of the product, demonstrating levels of quality along each gradient. In some systems, 
the category ratings exist as mathematically independent values from the overall outlook, 
whereas others average them out or use a weighted calculation to derive the final score.

### Benefits

The most obvious benefit of these systems is the ability to give consumers a deeper 
quantitative look at the product. Some categories are more important than others, and 
a reviewer may choose to have one influence the final score more than another. Readers 
may have different opinions on what is important, so this gives them a chance to peek 
behind the curtain and feel like the ratings are a little less opaque. They can then judge 
for themselves if the overall score makes sense based on which categories they care most 
about, which in turn empowers them to make better decisions as consumers!

### Drawbacks

Of course, throwing multiple numbers (or letter grades) at your readers can also be confusing. 
After all, the goal of quantitative analysis is to provide a simple, intuitive look at each 
product. If not presented well, readers can get lost in the numbers and walk away with more 
questions than answers.

# Conclusion

If you've made it this far, bravo! You just walked through a deep dive into the different 
rating systems you'll see out in the wild, and hopefully you now feel more empowered as a 
reader. As we've said before, no system (even ours!) is perfect, but the important thing is 
to understand the pros and cons of a particular system. Always keep in mind that reviews 
are subjective to an individual's taste and preferences, and a system is only ever as good as 
the reviewer's attempts to stay consistent and keep their scores meaningful. Now, go out 
into the world of rating systems and crunch some numbers!

